ny data scientist can quickly run a model and conclude that there is a linear growth in the case discussed in section 1, and make projections based on that. However, this may not help the business if the projections, as we see so frequently in many projects, work for only 3 months or less. A deeper understanding of the opposite forces at play, balancing out and contributing to the overall growth, is needed to sustain the growth. And maybe this growth is not good after all. That's where deep analytical thinking comes in play.

Of course, the first thing to ponder is whether this is a critical business question, coming from an executive wondering about the health of its business (even and especially in good times,) or whether it is a post-mortem analysis related to a specific, narrow, tactical project. We will assume here that it is a critical, strategic question. In practice, data scientists know about the importance of each question, and treat them accordingly with the appropriate amount of deep thinking and prioritization. What I discuss next applies to a wide range of business situations.

Answering hidden questions

It is always good for a data scientist, to be involved in business aspects that are data related, but go beyond coding or implementing models. This is particularly true with small businesses, and it is one aspect of data science that is often overlooked. In bigger companies, this involves working with various teams, as a listener, challenger, and in an advisory role. The questions that we should ask are broken down below in three categories: business, data, and metrics related. 

Business questions:

Is your company pursuing the correct type of growth? Is it growing in the right segments? Is the growth shifting in the wrong direction? Do we now attract an audience that is not converting well (low ROI) or with high churn rate (low customer lifecycle value, high cost of user acquisition.) The data scientist is well positioned to access the relevant data and analyze it to answer this question. 
Is top management too much focused on bad growth? That is, growing for the sake of it to show to shareholders? There is good growth and bad growth. In many businesses, some bad growth (growth for the sake of it) is needed to impress clients, shareholders, employees, and because growth numbers from competitors are also fueled partly by bad growth. That is why you want to show that your company is growing as fast as your competition. Good growth, to the contrary, is focused on long terms outcomes. However, now that granular data from most companies is widely available or can be purchased and analyzed by experts, it is becoming more difficult to fake the growth. Anyway, when analyzing statistics, you must be able to discriminate between good and bad growth.
What external factors impact the bottom line metrics? Competition and market trends are two of them. Knowing that a competitor just received a new round of funding and is spending it on advertising, can be very valuable to gain insights. Or in our example, the big dip corresponds to holiday traffic in December.
What internal factors are at play and "influencing" your data? It could be increased marketing efforts by your company, a website that was made much more efficient, some business acquisition or new products, the definition of a metric that was changed internally (with impact on measured numbers). The data scientist should be informed about these events, and indeed, proactively ask questions when data trends are seen but can not be explained. Even when data sounds stable, it could be the effect of two sources, one negative, and one positive, canceling out. Always be curious about what is happening in your company, with your competitors and the market in general.
Data questions:

Are we gathering data from external sources, to validate internal data? In our case, data from Google Analytics can be wrong. Having an external source will help you pinpoint discrepancies and understand what is exactly measured by the various sources. A tool such as Alexa not only provides an alternate source of measurements, but also provide data points about competition.
Is some data duplicated, missing, corrupt, or not available? Are you working with the IT and BI team to collect the right data, get it properly summarized, accessible via dashboards or straight from databases, and archived appropriately, locally or externally? Do you maintain a data log, that lists all changes to data over time?
Do you know the biggest mechanisms introducing biases and errors in your data? In our case, Google Analytics is sensitive to smart bots generating artificial traffic, to websites not being tracked or tagged properly, and to new advertising campaigns being launched, introducing shifts in geolocation and traffic quality. Address all these issues with the right people in your company. Sometimes it requires having access to additional data. 
Question about the metrics:

Are you collecting the most useful metrics? What important metrics are missing or would be useful to have? Do we you enough granularity? Do you focus on the right metrics? New users might be more important than total users. Pageview numbers are easily manipulated by third parties and thus less reliable. Session duration may be meaningless if users spend a lot of time watching videos on your website. A lot of traffic from US is not good if it is from demographic segments not bringing any value. High traffic numbers might not be good if users complain about the poor quality of your content.
Finding proxy metrics when the exact ones are not available. For instance, zip code data could be used instead of income. When creating web forms, adding mandatory fields could result in more useful databases and better targeting, though changes also impact the data and create back-compatibility issues, making comparisons difficult when analyzing time series.
A simple question such as the one discussed in section 1, is too generic. You must analyze growth in various segments, and sometimes, you may discover segments that need to shrink rather than grow. For instance, a website that accepts credit card transactions, written in English, might not be appropriate for countries where credit card use is non-existent, or in locales that can sue you because your content is in English rather than in the local, mandatory language.  
Should you use a longer time window (if available) to get a better picture, assuming the data is consistent over time? Or monthly rather than weekly data? How frequently should this analysis be done? Can it be automated if done frequently enough? Should it be included in dashboard reporting? Which charts to use to communicate the insights visually, with maximum impact and value to the stakeholder?
In the next section, we focus on the modeling aspects, offering different perspectives on how to better analyze the type of data  discussed in our case study.